You’re driving one day, you look away from the road for just a moment, and it happens. Your front is already buried into another driver’s rear the time you look up to see what happened. Your adrenaline is pumping, but you are for the most part, ok. You proceed with the usual routine-- check on the other driver, assess the damage, and then the dreaded exchanging of insurance information. The hard part is about to begin.

Filing an auto insurance claim can be a frustrating and tedious process, made only harder by the stress and possible injury that accompanies a car accident. Luckily, if familiarize yourself with the procedure of filing a claim, and the proper coverage to file it through, the whole situation can be made much easier.

What To Do After An Accident
The moments after the accident are crucial. Your ability to collect yourself and carefully assess the situation may be paramount to how easy the insurance process will be. Once the area around you is safe to get out, the best thing to do is to check on the other driver. Be careful not to give away any indication of “fault” however. Different states have different rules about defining fault. In some states the damage expenses may be split proportionality, so if you are later deemed 90% at-fault, you still do not have to pay for 10% of the damage. By admitting fault at the scene can lead you to losing any leverage you may have when defending yourself at a later time. The best thing to do right after the accident is to simply see if the other driver or drivers are in good shape.

If anyone is hurt, call 911 immediately. If the accident is large as well, even if there are no injuries, you should call 911. Police reports can make processing claims much easier as well making proving fault much easier. The word of an officer is highly regarded in these instances against policyholders. You may not want to cause a scene or feel it is unnecessary, but a police report may end up saving you thousands in the long run.

Next thing to do is to record everything. Take a picture of the accident from multiple angles. Assess the road conditions, the weather, even the state of the other driver or drivers. If you suspect another driver to be intoxicated for example, if you haven’t called 911 yet, now would be the time to do it. Intoxication will be harder to prove as time goes on.

Filing the Claim If…
No One Was Injured and There Is No Extensive Damage
This is the best case of accidents. The other driver is safe, you’re safe and maybe there’s a slight bit of damage on one or both cars. Things will be even better if you have collision insurance. Collision insurance covers damage to your car incurred by an accident and is handled by your own insurance company. Whenever you can, file through your own company before the other driver's.As long as your deductible is less than the total damage cost, collision insurance is your best bet. Simply call your insurance agent or through their online website.

If you do not have collision insurance, you will have to file a claim through the other driver’s property damage liability (PD) insurance. Going through another company will take more time, but if the damage is small and inexpensive, it should not have too many issues getting processed. Just be sure to consult with your own insurer before settling on any agreement.

If the damage is less than $500 as well, you need not worry about your rates going up since most insurance companies do not even qualify accidents as anything that costs less than $500 to fix.

No One Was Injured But There is Heavy Damage
The procedure here is similar to above. Again, go through your collision insurance if you can. Whether you are at-fault or not at-fault this will be the fastest and easiest process. If you are not at-fault, you may even be able to get the money back from your deductible if your insurance company can settle with the other driver’s company at a later date. Again, if you do not have collision, you will have to go through the other driver’s PD. An expensive claim will be trickier to process though and has a greater chance of denial. It is here where a police report and careful assessment of the scene will pay off.

The Other Driver Was Injured
If the other driver was injured, there is not much you can do on your end. If your car was damaged, but the accident was not 100% your fault (again, get a police report), you are still entitled to a pay out. You just have to hope that your limits for your own Bodily Injury insurance will cover any medical expenses the other driver may incur. It may come down to a battle between insurance companies about the fault of the accident. Never settle without consulting your insurer, and if matters escalate hiring an attorney may be the best move.

You Were Injured
This depends on your coverage and in what state you live in. If you are in a no-fault state like Utah, then you have personal injury protection insurance (PIP). Essentially, PIP is like collision insurance for your body. Also like collision insurance this will be the fastest and easiest claim to process because it goes through your own insurance. In states that do not require mandatory PIP, you have the option to buy Medical Payments (MedPay) insurance which essentially does the same thing. Both types of coverage can be completely worth the extra payment if you can afford it. In North Carolina for example, while the the state is not a mandatory PIP state, there is pure contributory negligence. This means, even if you were deemed 1% at fault in an accident, the other driver is not legally required to pay for the 99% of personal injury damages they caused. If you have PIP though, you do not have to worry about not being able to pay your medical bills. To summarize, always go through PIP or MedPay if you have it (and you probably should if you live in a pure contributory state). If you do not have either of those, once more you will need to go through the other driver’s bodily injury liability insurance, and engage with the other company to be sure the claim is not denied.

You Are Injured and/or Have Car Damage but the Other Driver is Uninsured or Underinsured.
In this case, hopefully you have under and/or uninsured motorist insurance. The premium for this coverage is usually pretty low compared to other coverages, and will drastically bail you out in a situation like this. Filing a claim through UM does not require a deductible and will not raise your rates if you are not at-fault. Unfortunately, if you do not have this insurance, and the other driver’s insurance cannot cover your expenses, a legal battle may be necessary to pay for your expenses.

Craig Casazza
Craig is a former research analyst at ValuePenguin covering property and casualty insurance, including auto, homeowners, renters and motorcycle insurance.